Benazir Bhutto was born at Karachi's Pinto Hospital on 21 June 1953. She was the eldest child of Sindhi Rajput Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Begum Nusrat Ispahani, of Iranian Kurdish descent. She had three younger siblings—Murtaza, Shahnawaz and Sanam. According to Benazir, her mother's Kurdish culture played a big role in Bhutto becoming Prime Minister.
Bhutto grew up speaking both English and Urdu, with English her first language. While she spoke fluent Urdu, it was often colloquial rather than formal. In her autobiography 'Daughter of the East', Bhutto also makes reference to using Sindhi, joking about misunderstanding the "Mohenjo-daro". According to various interviews given by former household servants, she and her father would speak to them in their native Sindhi.
She attended the Lady Jennings Nursery School and the Convent of Jesus and Mary in Karachi. After two years at the Rawalpindi Presentation Convent, she was sent to the Jesus and Mary Convent at Murree. She passed her O-level examinations at 15. She then completed her A-Levels at the Karachi Grammar School.
She pursued her higher education in the United States; from 1969 to 1973 she attended Radcliffe College at Harvard University, where she obtained a BA with cum laude honours in comparative government. She was also elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Bhutto later called her time at Harvard "four of the happiest years of my life" and said it formed "the very basis of her belief in democracy". In 1995, as Prime Minister, she arranged a gift from the Pakistani government to Harvard Law School.
Between 1973 and 1977 Bhutto studied Philosophy, Politics, and Economics at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford (LMH) and took additional courses in International Law and Diplomacy. After LMH she attended St Catherine's College, Oxford. In December 1976 Bhutto was elected president of the Oxford Union, and became the first Asian woman to head the prestigious debating society. Her undergraduate career was dogged by controversy, partly due to her father's unpopularity with student politicians. She was also president of the Oxford Majlis Asian Society.