Early life
Trump was born on June 14, 1946, at the Jamaica Hospital Medical Center in the Jamaica neighborhood of Queens, New York City. He was the fourth of five children born to Frederick Christ "Fred" Trump (1905–1999) and Mary Anne Trump (née MacLeod, 1912–2000). His siblings are Maryanne, Fred Jr., Elizabeth, and Robert. Trump's older brother Fred Jr. died in 1981 from alcoholism, which Trump says led him to abstain from alcohol and cigarettes.
Ancestry
Trump is of paternal German ancestry and maternal Scottish ancestry. His mother and grandparents were born in Europe.
His paternal grandfather, Friedrich Trump, originally emigrated to the United States in 1885, became a citizen in 1892, and amassed a fortune operating boom-town restaurants and boarding houses in the Seattle area and Klondike, Canada. After marrying in 1902, the family moved back to Kallstadt but were ordered to leave because Friedrich did not complete the mandatory military service and did not register his initial emigration to the United States.
His father was born in the Bronx, and became a New York City real estate developer. His mother emigrated from her birthplace of Tong, Lewis, Scotland to New York, where she worked as a maid. Fred and Mary met in New York and married in 1936, raising their family in Queens.
His uncle John G. Trump—a professor at MIT from 1936 to 1973—was involved in radar research for the Allies in the Second World War, and helped design X-ray machines that prolonged the lives of cancer patients. in January 1943, physicist Nikola Tesla died in his room at the New Yorker Hotel, and the FBI requested John Trump to examine Tesla's papers and equipment.
The Trump family were originally Lutherans, but Trump's parents belonged to the Reformed Church in America. The family name, which was formerly spelled Drumpf, was changed to Trump during the Thirty Years' War in the 17th century. Trump has said that he is proud of his German heritage; he served as grand marshal of the 1999 German-American Steuben Parade in New York City.
Education
Trump attended the Kew-Forest School. At 13, he enrolled in the New York Military Academy (NYMA), in Cornwall, New York, where he finished eighth grade and high school.
Trump attended Fordham University in the Bronx for two years, beginning in August 1964. He then transferred to the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, which offered one of the few real estate studies departments in United States academia at the time. While there, he worked at the family's company, Elizabeth Trump & Son, named for his paternal grandmother. He graduated from Penn in May 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in economics.
Trump was not drafted during the Vietnam War. While in college from 1964 to 1968, he obtained four student deferments. In 1966, he was deemed fit for service based upon a military medical examination, and in 1968 was briefly classified as fit by a local draft board, but was given a 1-Y medical deferment in October 1968. He has attributed his medical deferment to heel spurs. In 1969, he received a high number in the draft lottery, which would also have likely exempted him from service.
Family
Trump has five children by three marriages, and has eight grandchildren. His first two marriages ended in widely publicized divorces.
Trump married his first wife, Czech model Ivana Zelníčková, on April 7, 1977 at the Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan in a ceremony performed by the Reverend Norman Vincent Peale. They had three children: son Donald Jr. (born December 31, 1977), daughter Ivanka (born October 30, 1981), and son Eric (born January 6, 1984). Ivana became a naturalized United States citizen in 1988. The couple divorced in 1990 following Trump's affair with actress Marla Maples.
In October 1993, Maples gave birth to their daughter Tiffany, named after Tiffany & Company. They married two months later on December 20, 1993. The couple divorced in June 1999.
Trump married Slovene model Melania Knauss, on January 22, 2005 at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church on the island of Palm Beach, Florida; a reception followed at Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate. In 2006, Melania became a naturalized United States citizen. She gave birth to their son Barron on March 20, 2006. Barron is fluent in Slovene and English.
Religious views
Trump identifies as Presbyterian. As a child, he began going to church at the First Presbyterian Church in Jamaica, Queens. He attended Sunday school and had his confirmation at that church. Trump said in 2015 that he attends Reformed Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, where he married his first wife Ivana in 1977, and the church says he is not an "active member". He is also loosely affiliated with Lakeside Presbyterian Church in West Palm Beach, Florida, near his Mar-a-Lago estate. In December 2016, Trump visited Bethesda-by-the-Sea, an Episcopal church, for Christmas services.
Trump has said that he participates in Holy Communion. Beyond that, he has not asked God for forgiveness, stating: "I think if I do something wrong, I just try and make it right. I don't bring God into that picture."
Trump refers to his ghostwritten book The Art of the Deal as "my second favorite book of all time, after the Bible. Nothing beats the Bible". In a speech to Liberty University, he referred to Second Corinthians as "Two Corinthians", eliciting chuckles from the audience. Despite this, The New York Times reported that Evangelical Christians nationwide thought "that his heart was in the right place, that his intentions for the country were pure".
Outside of his church affiliations, Trump has relationships with a number of Christian spiritual leaders, including Florida pastor Paula White, who has been described as his "closest spiritual confidant." In 2015, he asked for and received a blessing from Greek Orthodox priest Emmanuel Lemelson and, in 2016, released a list of his religious advisers, including James Dobson, Jerry Falwell Jr., Ralph Reed and others.
Referring to his daughter Ivanka's conversion to Judaism before her marriage to Jared Kushner, Trump said in 2015: "I have a Jewish daughter; and I am very honored by that […] it wasn't in the plan but I am very glad it happened."
Health
A 2016 medical report by his doctor, Harold Bornstein M.D., showed that Trump's blood pressure, liver and thyroid function were in normal ranges. Trump says that he has never smoked cigarettes or consumed other drugs, including marijuana. He also does not drink alcohol, a decision stemming from his brother's death from alcoholism.
Net worth
Trump was listed on the initial Forbes List of wealthy individuals in 1982 as having an estimated $200 million fortune, including a share of his father's estimated $200 million net worth. He was absent from the list from 1990 to 1995 following losses which reportedly obliged him to borrow from his siblings' trusts in 1993. Trump told campaign audiences he began his career with "a small loan of one million dollars" from his father, which he paid back with interest.
On June 16, 2015, when announcing his candidacy, Trump released a one-page financial summary stating a net worth of $8,737,540,000. "I'm really rich", he said. Forbes believed his suggestion of $9 billion was "a whopper", figuring it was actually $4.1 billion. The summary statement includes $3.3 billion worth of "real estate licensing deals, brand and branded developments", putting a figure on Trump's estimate of his own brand value. The July 2015 FEC disclosure reports assets worth above $1.4 billion and debts above $265 million. According to Bloomberg, Trump "only reported revenue for [his] golf properties in his campaign filings even though the disclosure form asks for income", whereas independent filings showed his European golf properties to be unprofitable. Trump has stated that his income for the year 2014 was $362 million.
After Trump made controversial remarks about illegal immigrants in 2015, he lost business contracts with NBCUniversal, Univision, Macy's, Serta, PVH Corporation, and Perfumania, which Forbes estimated negatively impacted his net worth by $125 million. The value of the Trump brand may have fallen further during his presidential campaign, as some consumers boycotted Trump-branded products and services to protest his candidacy. Bookings and foot traffic at Trump-branded properties fell off sharply in 2016, and the release of the Access Hollywood tape recordings in October 2016 exacerbated this.
In their 2016 annual billionaires' rankings, Forbes estimated Trump's net worth at $4.5 billion (113th in the United States, 324th in the world) and Bloomberg at $3 billion, making him one of the richest politicians in American history. Trump himself stated that his net worth was over $10 billion, with the discrepancy essentially stemming from the uncertain value of appraised property and of his personal brand.