Leon Trotsky was born Lev Davidovich Bronstein on 7 November 1879, the fifth child in a Russian Jewish family, of wealthy (but illiterate) farmers in Yanovka or Yanivka, in the Kherson governorate of the Russian Empire (now Bereslavka, in Ukraine), a small village 24 kilometres (15 mi) from the nearest post office. His parents were David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847–1922) and his wife Anna Lvovna (née Zhivotovskaya) (1850–1910). The family was of Jewish origin. The language they spoke at home was Surzhyk, a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian. Trotsky's younger sister, Olga, who also grew up to be a Bolshevik and a Soviet politician, married the prominent Bolshevik Lev Kamenev.
Many anti-Communists, anti-semites, and anti-Trotskyists have noted Trotsky's original surname, stressing the political and historical significance of the surname Bronstein. Some authors, notably Robert Service, have also claimed that Trotsky's childhood first name was the Yiddish "Leiba." The American Trotskyist David North said that this was an apparent attempt to emphasize Trotsky's Jewish origins but, contrary to Service's claims, there is no documentary evidence to support it. He says that it is highly improbable that the family was Jewish, as they did not speak Yiddish, the common language among eastern European Jews. Both North and Walter Laqueur in their books say that Trotsky's childhood name was Lyova, a standard Russian diminutive of the name "Lev."
When Trotsky was nine, his father sent him to Odessa to be educated in a Jewish school. He was enrolled in a German-language school, which became Russified during his years in Odessa as a result of the Imperial government's policy of Russification. As Isaac Deutscher notes in his biography of Trotsky, Odessa was then a bustling cosmopolitan port city, very unlike the typical Russian city of the time. This environment contributed to the development of the young man's international outlook. Although Trotsky said in his autobiography My Life that he was never perfectly fluent in any language but Russian and Ukrainian, Raymond Molinier wrote that Trotsky spoke French fluently.