
Princess Diana - First wife of Prince Charles, Dian was involved in many humanitarian charities. Helped to de-stigmatise diseases such as AIDS.

Confucius - Influential Chinese philosopher who laid groundwork for much of Chinese philosophy and society. Confucius taught principles of morality, reverence for ancestors and orderly conduct.

Mozart - A musical genius whose compositions continue to give joy to millions of people.

John Keats - Romantic Poet. Keats lived a short life, but the intensity of his poetry has left a deep and lasting legacy. 'A thing of beauty is a joy forever."-Keats.

Eleanor Roosevelt - A supporter of the rights of women and committed to the oppressed in society, Eleanor also helped to draft the UN Declaration of human rights.

Woodrow Wilson - Woodrow Wilson had a vision for a League of Nations, a forum where nations could come together to solve disputes. The League of Nations struggled to make an impact before the Second World War but became more effective as the United Nations.

Leo Tolstoy - Influential Russian author, whose great epics include War and Peace. His philosophy of non-violence and a return to rural simplicity inspired other politicians such as Gandhi.

Sri Krishna - Revered as Hindu Spiritual Teacher. His teachings are immortalised in the Bhagavad Gita. Krishna taught a middle path of yoga, selfless action and devotional worship.

Louis Pasteur - French scientist who found many important improvements in medical science, e.g. vaccination for Rabies, and a safe way to pasteurise milk.

Rumi - Muslim poet and Sufi mystic. His poetry about love and the deeper meaning of life have a universal appeal. Rumi has become one of the best-selling poets in the world.

Charles Darwin - Darwin published his Origin of Species detailing a belief in evolution at a time when such a decision was very controversial.

Akbar - The Great Moghul Emperor who went a long way to uniting India under his rule. Akbar was known for his love of culture, music and philosophy, although he was also a great warrior. He introduced enlightened laws on religious tolerance in his kingdom and encouraged representatives of different religions to come to his court.

C S Lewis - Author of best-selling 'Chronicles of Narnia' and Christian apologist.


Oprah Winfrey - US talk show host who became an important figurehead for women in America. Encouraged belief in self-improvement.

Martin Luther - Martin Luther was the most influential figure in the Reformation of the sixteenth century. It was Luther who challenged the excesses of the Catholic church, leading to the Protestant movement and forcing the Catholic Church to reinvigorate itself.

Edward Jenner - led pioneering work on the development of an inoculation against deadly smallpox. Opened up the way to more immunisations, arguably saving the lives of millions of people around the world.

Sir Isaac Newton - One of the greatest scientists of all time. Isaac Newton led the foundation of modern physics with his development of theories on gravity and mechanics.

St Francis of Assisi - Christian mystic who founded a new monastic order committed to the essence of the Christian gospels.

14th Dalai Lama - Spiritual leader of Tibetan people. Helped to popularise principles of Buddhism around the world.

Pablo Picasso - Iconic twentieth-century artist, known for his commitment to peace.

John Lennon - Iconic singer-songwriter. Member of the Beatles.

Desmond Tutu - South African anti-apartheid campaigner. He sought to heal wounds after the end of apartheid through the Truth and Reconciliation committee.

Michelangelo - Never suffering from false modesty, Michelangelo referred to himself as 'God's own artist'. But, in the case of Michelangelo his self-belief was well justified. His artistic output includes some of the greatest works of art ever produced: The Pieta, The Sistine Chapel, the Statue of David.

Jesse Owens - Jesse Owen's four gold medals at Hitler's 1936 Olympics in Berlin was one of the great moments of sport, which helped to puncture the Nazi ideology of Aryan supremacy. Jesse Owens was a modest hero who remained a great ambassador for the sport.

Pope John Paul II - Polish pope who played a role in the transition from a Communist to a more democratic Eastern Europe.


St Teresa of Avila - 16th Century Spanish mystic and poet. Helped revitalise religious life in Spain, despite the Inquisition and patriarchal nature of society.

Pele - One of world's greatest ever footballers. Became international sporting icon.

Abbe Pierre - French humanitarian who set up a charity for the homeless.

Sri Aurobindo - Early Indian nationalist leader who later retired from politics to devote his life to yoga, spirituality and poetry.

Annie Besant - involved in representing women and workers in 19th Century Britain. Became leading member of Theosophy Society and supported Indian independence.

Emile Zatopek - Greatest long distance runner, winning three gold medals at the 1954 Olympics. A principled supporter of Czech democracy, he was sent to work in mines for his opposition to the Communist government.

St Therese Lisieux - A Carmelite nun, who died aged 24, unknown to the world. After her death her simple writings had a profound effect becoming one of the best-selling spiritual writings. Her approach was a deceptively simple approach of doing the smallest acts with love.

Audrey Hepburn - Actress later involved in working for UNESCO.

Betty Williams - Awarded Nobel Peace Prize for her peace work in Northern Ireland.



Bob Geldof - Musician and charity campaigner. Launched 'Band Aid' in 1984 to help African famine.

Eva Peron - Argentinian First Lady, founded influential charity and helped create a more equal society.

Sir Titus Salt - Victorian industrialist who was also concerned for the welfare of workers. Helped to build a model village and insist on better working conditions.

Aung San Suu Kyi - Leader of opposition in Myanmar. Recently released from house arrest, she has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her fight for democracy and human rights.

Dietrich Bonhoeffer - German pastor and pacifist who was executed for his opposition to Hitler in Nazi Germany.

Harriet Beecher Stowe - American writer and campaigner against slavery. The author of Uncle Tom's Cabin.

Kofi Annan - Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1997 to 2006. Awarded Nobel Peace Prize in 2001.

Lech Walesa - Polish opposition leader who became a symbolic figure in efforts to end Communist rule.

Malala Yousafzai - Pakistani schoolgirl who defied threats of the Taliban to campaign for the right to education. She survived being shot in the head by the Taliban and has become a global advocate for human rights, women's rights and the right to education.

